# Clojure Fam ; Week 1 ; Day 3

```clojure
(repeat "Functions are cool")
```

## Expectations

My primary expectation for today was to really try to get into a functional frame of mind. After yesterday's *revelations* with the 4Clojure problems, I wanted to try to solidify those *revelations* and make sure that I was comfortable with them. On a more quotidian note, I also wanted to see how many of the 4Clojure Problems I could complete.

## What I learned

Today's learning material was [Chapter 3](https://aphyr.com/posts/303-clojure-from-the-ground-up-functions) of Clojure from the Ground Up. It's all about Functions. I still remembered some of the material I studied in Brave and True so I was able to get through the chapter without much ado.

Observations:

- `let` provides a lexical closure within which you can bind values to symbols. It doesn't extend beyond the `let` expression but you can change the binding for any symbol. Bindings seem to be evaluated sequentially with the output of earlier bindings being available to later ones.
- Functions exist to defer computation. We identify common pieces of logic in our program and chunk them away into functions that can be re-used at our discretion. This helps us to reason about our programs more effectively.
- While Clojure provides excellent immutable data structures, it also gives us an escape hatch for mutable logic with `def`. However, since redefining symbols at will can cause unintended side-effects, it is idiomatic Clojure to reserve `def` for initial setup and REPL hacking.
- Functions can variadic. You can handle multiple arities explicitly or use `[& args]` to slurp up all remaining args into a list.
- Most functions are made of other, simpler functions. Clojure does have some constructs (`let, def`) that aren't defined in terms of other functions. These are known as Special Forms and are core axioms of the language.

Threader macro forms are very elegant ways of expressing transformations on data. It allows us to express code like this :

```clojure
(sort (rest (reverse [4 3 6 2 7 1])))
```

in this form:

```clojure
(-> [4 3 6 2 7 1]
		(reverse)
		(rest)
		(sort))
```

The expression is passed down from expression to expression as the second item in the list. This form makes it much easier to understand how the data flows and transforms.

### Introspection

There are so many cool Clojure introspection features that I felt it needs its own section.

`type` gives you the concrete type of an object. If `type` isn't being useful, use `supers` to get all the supertypes of the object. Supertypes is the set of all types that includes the given `type`.
We can check if a given object is a function with `fn?`. We can get the documentation for a function with `doc`. Want to find the associated metadata for an object? Simply use `(meta #'obj)`. Confused how a function is implemented? Fret not, `source` is here to save the day.

That a language is so honest and forthcoming with it's fundamentals and source is amazing. Using functions like `doc` and `source` becomes second nature when you're using the REPL and it's incredibly helpful to have access to them locally.

On a personal introspection note, I'm slowly getting more accustomed to spending time gathering my thoughts, taking notes on something I found interesting so I can share them with anyone reading this. I've also often struggled with feeling inadequate with my technical skills and this feeling sometimes surfaces when working on challenging problems. But as I spend more time interacting with my fellow learners, I feel myself learning that it's ok to struggle. Everyone learns at their own pace. I'll get there too.

## More 4 Clojure

'Twas a good day in 4Clojure land. I spent quite some time throughout the day working on problems and I was able to complete an additional 20 problems.

There were quite a few interesting functions and concepts that I ran across like  `recur`, `for`,`partition` and `iterate` . I definitely have to spend some time understanding the nature of `recur` in particular since I think it's non-stack-consuming nature would make it useful for intensive recursion.

[**23**](http://www.4clojure.com/problem/23) was a particularly vexing one. My initial solution for it used `map` and `nth` but that didn't work since one of the test cases supplied a set as input. (`nth` doesn't really make sense for an unordered collection).

```clojure
(fn [xs] (map #(nth xs %) (range (- (count xs) 1) -1 -1)))
```

I tried a recursive function next.

```clojure
(defn newrev [xs]
  (if (= (count xs) 2)
    (list (second xs) (first xs))
    (conj (newrev (take (- (count xs) 1) xs)) (last xs))))
```

This is very contrived way of solving the problem. Let's break it down.

The base condition is that if the collection has 2 elements, we flip them and return. I made the assumption that the output had to be list. This impacted how I approached the problem, since `conj` behaves differently on lists and vectors.

*@adrien[https://twitter.com/adriend]* made the other assumption leading to a more elegant use of `conj`

```clojure
(fn rev [coll]
  (if (empty? coll)
    []
    (conj (rev (rest coll)) (first coll))))
```

However, in my opinion, *[@banditelol](https://twitter.com/banditelol)* had the most elegant solution with `reduce` and `conj`.

```clojure
(fn rev [coll]
  (reduce (fn [x y] (conj x y)) () coll))
```

## Conclusion

In the end, I learned quite a bit about how `reduce` and `conj` and recursion works in Clojure. The next time I see a problem that needs any of these, you betcha I'm gonna kick it's ass.

Let's end this day with a nice little tally:

- 20 4Clojure Problems
- Chapter 3 of *CFGU*
- Finished Part 1 of *My Love Letter to Clojure*
- Answered someone's question on the Athen's discord
- Added some new functions to the `cheatsheets\clojure.md` file.

```clojure
(repeat "See ya Tomorrow!")
```

You can also find this post on [Notion](https://www.notion.so/itsrainingmani/Clojure-Fam-Week-1-Day-3-ae2a395fd63249278ab7364763e14c49).
