# ClojureFam - Week 3 - Day 1

I ended up feeling pretty sick today so I wasn't able to spend time doing my usual amount of work on Clojure today.

But regardless, I did want to make some progress. So I worked on a few 4Clojure Problems. And my first PR to the Athens repo got successfully merged!

## 4Clojure Problems

#### 95. To Tree, or not to Tree

Write a predicate which checks whether or not a given sequence represents a binary tree. Each node in the tree must have a value, a left child, and a right child.

```clojure
(defn istree?
  [tree]
  (if (coll? tree)
    (if (= (count tree) 3)
      (and (istree? (second tree)) (istree? (nth tree 2)))
      false)
    (nil? tree)))

(istree? [1 nil [2 [3 nil nil] [4 nil nil]]])
```

#### No. 118 Re-implement Map

Map is one of the core elements of a functional programming language. Given a function f and an input sequence s, return a lazy sequence of (f x) for each element x in s.

`(= [3 4 5 6 7] ;; (__ inc [2 3 4 5 6]))`

```clojure
(defn reimplement-map
  [f s]
  (if-not (nil? (next s))
    (lazy-seq (cons (f (first s)) (reimplement-map f (rest s))))
    (list (f (first s)))))

(reimplement-map inc [2 3 4 5 6])
(reimplement-map (fn [_] nil) (range 10))
```

This one was interesting since my first intuition was to implement map in terms of reduce. But reduce doesn't play well with lazy-seq so I had to switch to using cons.

#### No. 128 Recognize Playing Cards

Write a function which converts (for example) the string "SJ" into a map of {:suit :spade, :rank 9}. A ten will always be represented with the single character "T", rather than the two characters "10".

`(= {:suit :diamond :rank 10} (__ "DQ"))`

```clojure
(defn cards
  [c]
  (let [info {}
        f (first c)
        s (second c)
        iparse #(Integer/parseInt (str %))]
    (-> info
        (assoc :suit
               (case f
                 \S :spade
                 \C :club
                 \H :heart
                 \D :diamond))
        (assoc :rank
               (case s
                 \T 8
                 \J 9
                 \Q 10
                 \K 11
                 \A 12
                 (- (iparse s) 2))))))

(cards "CA")
```

## Submitting a PR

Couple of things I learned from submitting my PR.

- I should have read the [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/athensresearch/athens/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) document a little more carefully and figured out how to deploy my version of devcards before commenting on the issue. This could have prevented some back and forths and led to a faster PR merge.
- GitHub Actions are very cool. It might be worth playing around with them for some other projects
- I need to figure out how to make `cljstyle` play better with VS Code.

It did feel nice to make even a small contribution to the project and I think I am more confident in working with the Athens code now.
