# ClojureFam - Week 3 - Day 5

Do you ever have that feeling sometime when you're working away at a problem, and you're getting nowhere? I experienced that recently with a 4Clojure problem - Pascal's triangles.

## Pascal's Triangles

> In mathematics, Pascal's triangle is a triangular array of the binomial coefficients.

For example - 

```text
    [1]
   [1 1]
  [1 2 1]
 [1 3 3 1]
[1 4 6 4 1]
```

The 4Clojure problem asks you to create a function which returns the nth row of Pascal's Triangle. I tried solving it before with map and reduce but it didn't work out.

Today, I decided to give the problem another shot. And lo and behold, a solution came to me in about 5 minutes.

```clojure
(defn pascalize
  ([n] (pascalize (dec n) '(1)))
  ([n p]
   (if (zero? n)
     p
     (recur (dec n) (conj (map #(apply + %)  (partition-all 2 1 p)) 1)))))
```

Dead simple. I think this was the first time I instinctively reached for a loop recur construct to solve a problem.

## Chapter 6

map and inc are symbols

When you give clojure a symbol like map,
it finds the corresponding var in the current namespace,
gets a shelf address, and retrieves an object from that
shelf for you.

if you want to use the symbol itself, quote it

```clojure
'inc
=> inc

'(map inc [1 2 3])
=> (map inc [1 2 3])

(def great-books ["Sherlock Holmes" "Alice in Wonderland"])
=> #'clojure-noob.ch6/great-books

great-books
=> ["Sherlock Holmes" "Alice in Wonderland"]
```

### Interning a var

* Updates the current ns map with the association between great-books and the var
* Stores the vector on a free shelf spot
* Returns the address of the shelf on the var Which is `#'clojure-noob.ch6/great-books`
* use (ns-interns *ns*) to see the namespace's map

```clojure
(get (ns-interns *ns*) 'great-books)
#'clojure-noob.ch6/great-books -> reader form of a var

;; use #' to grab ahold of the var corresponding to the symbol

(deref #'clojure-noob.ch6/great-books)
;; => ["Sherlock Holmes" "Alice in Wonderland"]

(def great-books ["The power of bees" "Journey to Upstairs"])

great-books
;; => ["The power of bees" "Journey to Upstairs"]
```

* create-ns -> take a symbol, creats a namepsace with that name if it doesnt exist already and returns the namespace

```clojure
(create-ns 'cheese.taxonomy)
=> #namespace[cheese.taxonomy]
```

You can use the returned namespace as an argument in a function call

```clojure
(ns-name (create-ns 'cheese.taxonomy))
=> cheese.taxonomy
```

* in-ns -> creates a namespace and switches to it
* use the fully-qualified name to refer to vars and fns from a different ns
* refer -> fine grained control over how to refer objects in other namespaces
calling refer with a ns symbol lets you refer to the corresponding namespace's symbols without having to use fully-qualified symbols
* filters -> :only, :exclude, :rename
* alias lets you call functions in other namespaces with a shorter name (or more semantically relevant)

### Project Organization

* source code is in src/
* Dashes in namespace names correspond to underscores in the filesystem
* To use code from a different file, we have to require it
* require takes a symbol designating a namespace and ensures that the namespace exists and is ready to be used.
* require lets you alias a namespace when you require it using :as or :alias
* `(require '[the-divine-cheese-code.visualization.svg :as svg])`
* equivalent to require and then alias

ns macro allows you to incorporate require, use, in-ns alias and refer
ns refers the clojure.core namespace by default

```clojure
(ns the-divine-cheese-code.core
  (:refer-clojure :exclude [println]))
```

## Chapter 7

* Macros allow you to transform arbitrary expressions into valid Clojure

Clojure Evaluation model - 
* Reads textual source code first -> produces Clojure data structures
* Clojure data structures -> evaluated

Homoiconic -> reason about the code as a set of data structures that you can manipulate programmatically.

* Lisps evaluate native data structures
* Clojure still evaluates tree structures, but the trees are structured using Clojure liss and the nodes are Clojure values

* Clojure reader converts code (+ 1 (* 6 7)) into a nested list.
* Clojure evaluator takes that data as input and produces a result. (also compiles to the JVM bytecode)

## Takeaways

Coming back to problems after a while is good and can yield productive results.
I also need to revisit old functions and what I've learned previously to keep the knowledge fresh in my mind.

Today's tally - 

* 1 4Clojure problem
* 1.5 Brave and True Clojure chapters
